**Readability**

**Overall simplicity**

*Fortran*

Hard to learn as there no proper indentation in coding

Execution of almost every feature has only one way of doing it

Doesn't support overloading

Less control statements

*Kotlin*

Easy to understand the components of the code as this language contain
proper indentations

There are multiple ways of doing the feature over and over again

Supports overloading

More control statements

**Orthogonality**

*Fortran*

Less semantic words are used than Kotlin

*Kotlin*

More semantic words are used than Fortran

Can form new features with existing features

**Data Types**

*Fortran*

Unable to define new data types

*Kotlin*

Can define new data types and structures

**Syntax considerations**

*Fortran*

Variables are always globally defined and referenced by memory that
doesn't support the developers with unique scope implementations

Full less and weak control structures

*Kotlin*

Variables can be defined locally as well as globally. With rich and
advanced control structured, it is easier for developers to execute and
manipulate variables for their choice

**Writability**

**Simplicity and orthogonality**

*Fortran*

Less numbers of constructs that make developers to remember the language
easier

*Kotlin*

More number of constructs that make hard for developers to remember

**Support for abstraction**

*Fortran*

Subprograms must be known by the user to construct a program

*Kotlin*

Almost zero constructs when user has to know about what is defined by
the popular constructs

**Expressivity**

*Fortran*

Supports vast number of computation feature even with complex numbers in
less coding

*Kotlin*

Requires same number of coding as modern languages but a smaller number
of coding to express what is needed to be done than earlier programming
languages

**Reliability**

**Overall simplicity**

*Fortran*

Need two separate commands to compile and run

Less error checking in compiling outputting with weak results

*Kotlin*

Just one "Run" click to execute the program

Notifying the developer at all costs when an error happens and provide
instructions about the error

**Exception handling**

*Fortran*

No exception handling is done

*Kotlin*

Can use built-in exceptions to catch what the developer needs and we can
create our own exceptions as well

**Aliasing**

*Fortran*

Unable to have more than one method in access the same memory as all the
variables and functions are passed by reference

*Kotlin*

Can have access to more than one method in the same memory

**Readability & Writability**

*Fortran*

Less readability and writability when comparing with Kotlin

*Kotlin*

More readability and writability when comparing with Fortran

**Cost**

**Cost to train the programmers**

*Fortran*

Less numbers of constructs that make developers to remember the language
easier

*Kotlin*

More number of constructs that make hard for developers to remember

**Cost to create/ write programs**

*Fortran*

Subprograms must be known by the user to construct a program

*Kotlin*

Almost zero constructs when user has to know about what is defined by
the popular constructs

**Cost to compilation the program**

*Fortran*

Supports vast number of computation feature even with complex numbers in
less coding

*Kotlin*

Requires same number of coding as modern languages but a smaller number
of coding to express what is needed to be done than earlier programming
languages

**Cost of a language**

*Fortran*

This language requires higher cost to execute and to run programs as in
early days hardware were less efficient and high in cost

*Kotlin*

This language is available to develop more mobile applications and there
are vast number of devices available to program. So, the cost is very
low than Fortran

**Cost to execute the program**

*Fortran*

Required more computational time for IBM machines for calculations

*Kotlin*

Requires less time to compile and display the output to the user.

**Cost to build the compiler and runtime support system**

*Fortran*

Building the compiler and all the program features were done throughout
29 years and a lot of developers have spent their time to develop this
language

*Kotlin*

A few years of development time were taken for Kotlin and it was easy to
build the language with development of modern software and hardware

**Cost to recover from the problems**

*Fortran*

It was hard to understand some errors and sometimes the program is
compiled without throwing errors. So that recovering problems for
developers is hard.

*Kotlin*

Recovering from problems are easier in Kotlin as it shows the error in
runtime mentioning the error lines and possible solutions for those
errors.

**Cost to maintain the program**

*Fortran*

With the rapid advancement in computing in the 70's, a lot of changes
have made to Fortran. So, users of Fortran have to adopt according to
those changes as their programs were also hard to maintain.

With the less computing resources, the ways to solve problems were
narrow

*Kotlin*

Static typing and null safety help create reliable, maintainable code
that is easy to troubleshoot.

With modern programming languages' advancement, there are standard ways
to maintain a program than early stages of programming so it is easier
to solve problems with Kotlin than Fortran
